Create rule S7127: "std::size" should be used to determine the size of arrays (CPP-5791) (#4419)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S7127/cfamily/rule.adoc

> This rule raises an issue if the division of `sizeof` is used to compute the size of an array,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule raises an issue if a division of `sizeof` is used to compute the size of an array,
```

that could be replaced with `std::size` or `std::ranges::size` (since {cpp}20).

== Why is this an issue?

The `C` array does not expose the number of elements as a data member or a member function.
This information is present in the type system.

In {cpp} it can be extracted by calling `std::size` (introduced in {cpp}17) or `std::ranges::size` (introduced in {cpp}20),
as above functions supports C-arrays in addition to containers and ranges.

An alternative, which is supported also in C, is to divide the size of the array by the size of the element type.
Using this solution does not convey the intent of the code,
and may be prone to producing incorrect values when the element type is changed,

> but the `sizeof` code was not updated.

Reviewer 2: Done

This rule raises an issue when the division of `sizeof` is used to compute a number of elements in the array.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int carr[10]; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size = sizeof(carr) / sizeof(int); // Non-compliant
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int carr[10]; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size = std::size(carr); // Compliant
}
----

The rule also detects cases when the `sizeof` division is expanded from the macro:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

int carr[10]; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size = ARRAY_SIZE(carr); // Non-compliant
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

> 

Reviewer 2: I do not want to suggest that this needs to be removed at once; only the call side should be updated. I will add mentions after.

}
----

=== `std::array` is also covered

This rule will also raise issue when the `sizeof` division, 
is used to compute the size of the `std::array` type.

Such code may be leftover from the replacement of C-array,
without updating all necessary call sides (see S5954).

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size1 = sizeof(arr) / sizeof(int); // Non-compliant
  std::size_t size2 = ARRAY_SIZE(arr); // Non-compliant
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
#define array_size(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size1 = std::size(arr); // Compliant
  std::size_t size2 = std::size(arr); // Compliant
}
----

Alternatively, the `size` member function may be invoked in a non-generic code.

[source,cpp]
----
#define array_size(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size1 = arr.size(); // Compliant
  std::size_t size2 = arr.size(); // Compliant
}
----

=== How does this work?

> The implementation of `std::size` for arrays, relies on template argument deduction,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of `std::size` for arrays relies on template argument deduction
```

> to deduce the size of the array from the parameter that has reference to array type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to deduce the size of the array from the parameter that references an array type:
```

This rule raises an issue if a division of `sizeof` is used to compute the size of an array,
that could be replaced with `std::size` or `std::ranges::size` (since {cpp}20).

== Why is this an issue?

C-arrays do not expose their number of elements as a data member or a member function.
This information is present in the type system.

In {cpp} it can be extracted by calling `std::size` (introduced in {cpp}17) or `std::ranges::size` (introduced in {cpp}20),
as these functions support C-arrays in addition to containers and ranges.

> An alternative, which is supported also in C, is to divide the size of the array by the size of the element type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The historical way, inherited from C, is to divide the size of the array by the size of the element type.
```
or
```suggestion
An alternative, which is also supported in C, is to divide the size of the array by the size of the element type.
```

> Using this solution does not convey the intent of the code clearly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, using this solution does not convey the intent of the code as clearly,
```

and is prone to producing incorrect values when:
 
 * the element type is changed but the `sizeof` code was not updated,
 * `sizeof` was applied to pointer produced from array decay instead of the array itself.

This rule raises an issue when the division of `sizeof` is used to compute the number of elements in an array.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int carr[10]; 

void process() {

>   std::size_t size = sizeof(carr) / sizeof(int); // Non-compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  std::size_t size = sizeof(carr) / sizeof(int); // Noncompliant
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int carr[10]; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size = std::size(carr); // Compliant
}
----

The rule also detects cases where the `sizeof` division is expanded from a macro:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

int carr[10]; 

void process() {

>   std::size_t size = ARRAY_SIZE(carr); // Non-compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  std::size_t size = ARRAY_SIZE(carr); // Noncompliant
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

int carr[10]; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size = std::size(carr); // Compliant
}
----

> When all uses of the `ARRAY_SIZE` macro are removed, the macro should also be removed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once all uses of the `ARRAY_SIZE` macro have been removed, the macro should also be removed. 
```

> However doing so is not required to address issues raised by this rule,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However doing so is not required to address the issues raised by this rule,
```

as this allows code the be fixed incrementally.

=== `std::array` is also covered

> This rule will also raise issue when the `sizeof` division, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule will also raise an issue when the `sizeof` division, 
```

is used to compute the size of the `std::array` type.

Such code may be leftover from the replacement of C-array,
without updating all necessary call sites (see S5954).

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {

>   std::size_t size1 = sizeof(arr) / sizeof(int); // Non-compliant
>   std::size_t size2 = ARRAY_SIZE(arr); // Non-compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  std::size_t size1 = sizeof(arr) / sizeof(int); // Noncompliant
  std::size_t size2 = ARRAY_SIZE(arr); // Noncompliant
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size1 = std::size(arr); // Compliant
  std::size_t size2 = std::size(arr); // Compliant
}
----

Alternatively, the `size` member function may be invoked in a non-generic code.

[source,cpp]
----
#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0])

std::array<int, 10> arr; 

void process() {
  std::size_t size1 = arr.size(); // Compliant
  std::size_t size2 = arr.size(); // Compliant
}
----

=== How does this work?

The implementation of `std::size` for arrays relies on template argument deduction
to deduce the size of the array from the parameter that references an array type:

[source,cpp]
----
template<typename T, std::size_t N>

> constexpr N my_size(T const& (arr)[N]) {

Reviewer: Because you are describing the implementation of `std::size`, should this function be called `size`?
```suggestion
constexpr N size(T const& (arr)[N]) {
```

Reviewer 2: `std::size` has additional overloads to handle size member, so I wanted to avoid indicating that this is all that is needed for `size`. This is why I used `my_size`.
